Highlights for Ken Wilber-Sex, Ecology, Spirituality_ The Spirit of Evolution


Well, the psyche, for better or worse, is going somewhere, and that is why the process can get stuck, why it is fraught with frustration, arrest, fixation, stick points, logjams. If the mind weren't going somewhere, it could never get stuck, never get "sick." And these "sick points," these "stick points," can only be understood in terms of the mind's omega point, of where it wants to go. And not just Freud. "In an oft-cited formula, Piaget declares that there is no structure which lacks a development, and that the process of development can only be understood in view of the structure which exists at the beginning and the structures into which it will evolve."106 The basin and their attractors, their miniature omega points.

Thus, to give a few examples now: the autonomous ego of the Enlightenment is not that autonomous because it is actually set in the context of its own organic drives (the psychoanalytic critique of the Enlightenment),

heterarchy). I don't know why his followers have such a difficult time grasping his notion. Perhaps it is, as I suggested earlier, that they are in such reaction to pathological hierarchies that they toss the baby out with the bathwater. I think this is very understandable, because in some early versions of hierarchy, the conception was rather rigid and "fascist," and resulted, no doubt, from what we have called pathological agency.

as we will see, this is a constant problem in human affairs, where the desire to find a "larger meaning" often leads to too much communion or fusion with a "greater cause," and this fusion is mistaken for transcendence, whereas it is simply loss of autonomy and release from responsibility, which apparently is the attraction).

And this further explains why these theorists are, as Taylor puts it, "parasitic." Since they can't "come clean about the deeper sources of their own thinking," they necessarily live off nothing but the vocal denouncements of those views that do manage to consciously acknowledge their own qualitative distinctions. "Because their moral sources are unavowable, they are mainly invoked in polemic. Their principal words of power are denunciatory. Much of what they [actually] live by has to be inferred from the rage with which their enemies are attacked and refuted. This self-concealing kind of philosophy is also thereby parasitic.…" It lives to conquer, in the name of never conquering again.

They are morally superior in a universe where nothing is supposed to be superior.

