Highlights for Brad Blanton - Radical Honesty_ How To Transform Your Life By Telling The Truth-Dell (1996)


I believe that fascination with the game of creation is sufficient: that, in fact, it's the only game in town. And this wonderful game, once reserved for a few inspired perceivers, is now available to larger and larger numbers of people, because our culture itself is growing up. Our culture is growing to a place of young adulthood, growing beyond adolescence, for the first time in its history.

After a long period of romantic idealism, humanity is evolving a new way to live. Many are following the lead of great thinkers from previous centuries who knew, without using the term neurosis, that neurosis was a preoccupation with things of the mind, and that creation was' the cure for it. For many centuries, certain poets, philosophers, and scientists have recognized another whole realm of being, which is living with just what's so, from the perspective of having nothing to lose and nothing to gain. We need not approach the world from preoccupation with thoughts and feelings about being good or bad, judging whether the world is good or bad enough for us. We can just as easily live out of being fascinated with the game of creation.

After a long period of romantic idealism, humanity is evolving a new way to live. Many are following the lead of great thinkers from previous centuries who knew, without using the term neurosis, that neurosis was a preoccupation with things of the mind, and that creation was' the cure for it. For many centuries, certain poets, philosophers, and scientists have recognized another whole realm of being, which is living with just what's so, from the perspective of having nothing to lose and nothing to gain. We need not approach the world from preoccupation with thoughts and feelings about being good or bad, judging whether the world is good or bad enough for us. We can just as easily live out of being fascinated with

I can only tell the truth that is my truth at the moment. We don't have to agree with each other about how things are. We just have to listen to each other and get how things are for each other, now.

Truth can only be told if you are present in the telling and present to the person to whom you are talking. When I am describing to another person how things are, I am always describing how things are for me at the moment, or I am not telling the truth.

The truth is not some story about something that happened to you in the past. Telling stories about your memory of what happened may be entertaining for a while, but if that is all you can do it gets boring pretty fast.

People lost in the stratosphere of interpretations are lawyers and most people. People grounded in experience inelude some hillbillies, some golf pros, some other professional athletes, some Zen masters, some Gestalt therapists, most comedians, and some other people.

It's a hell of an assumption that your pain and my pain are the same, that your pleasure and my pleasure are alike, and that your perceptions match my perceptions, but this is the necessary basic level at which to begin. As a rule of thumb, if it's a choice between being lost in the stratosphere of thought or being dumb in downhome sensory reality, go home to sensate experience. Strange and mostly wonderful things happen to people when they are able to talk at the level of down-home reality.

We know at least two things by the time we've been tempered by despair and become road-worthy facers of disillusionment: 1. There are no dependable truths. There are more or less dependable truths, and they change now and then. 2. There is one dependable source for common agree ment. It is sensory data. We can and must assume that a direct report of sensory data is the closest we can get to shared common experience.

We know at least two things by the time we've been tempered by despair and become road-worthy facers of disillusionment: 1. There are no dependable truths. There are more or less dependable truths, and they change now and then. 2. There is one dependable source for common agree ment. It is sensory data.

When the mind is not imprisoning being, it's a marvelous thing. Its activities are fun. Fantasies are fun, predicting and controlling are fun, getting praise is fun, getting food is fun, organizing to produce results is fun, creating is fun. What justifies all of that work it took to develop a mind is that it turns out to be a great toy.

The mind considers life and death to be important. The being considers life and death to be life and death.

Only our willingness to live at risk, and in the knowledge of death, can keep the mind from squeezing the life out of us before we die.

The odds are against growing beyond adolescence in our adolescent society. The odds favor most of us, most of the time, remaining polite impotant fools who think we are special, but somehow don't get what we deserve. Most people feel like life hasn't lived up to its billing, hasn't turned out right, hasn't rewarded us appropriately. After a while, we give up thinking we are so hot and start dreaming about what could have been. This is the way life usually goes for most of us. We have all been waiting for a long time to grow beyond both these positive and negative self-images, and afraid to do so. Most of us never make it beyond adolescent hope and hype and disappointment. Wishing is a way to remove oneself from what is going on now. Hope springs eternal. Fuck hope. Hope is how most of us avoid growing up.

The odds are against growing beyond adolescence in our adolescent society. The odds favor most of us, most of the time, remaining polite impotant fools who think we are special, but somehow don't get what we deserve. Most people feel like life hasn't lived up to its billing, hasn't turned out right, hasn't rewarded us appropriately. After a while, we give up thinking we are so hot and start dreaming about what could have been. This is the way life usually goes for most of us.

Lying When you are lying, when you are keeping a secret, when you are withholding information or feelings in any moment, you are always doing that to protect something meaningless. You are usually protecting a memory to preserve a constant state of being. You can't see that what you are protecting is meaningless because the illusion of the self you are protecting blocks your view. When, through telling the truth, you destroy that illusion, you can then see that it was meaningless. Meaninglessness is of great value. When you finally get that who you actually are is empty and meaningless, it doesn't matter to you whether you are a jerk or not. There is where your power lives.

Lying When you are lying, when you are keeping a secret, when you are withholding information or feelings in any moment, you are always doing that to protect something meaningless. You are usually protecting a memory to preserve a constant state of being. You can't see that what you are protecting is meaningless because the illusion of the self you are protecting blocks your view.

Lying When you are lying, when you are keeping a secret, when you are withholding information or feelings in any moment, you are always doing that to protect something meaningless.

Reality is neither heaven nor hell, it's a playground where you may get hurt at times.

Each individual who matures to adulthood has to go through a late-adolescent hell and beyond. We have to learn to live lies. We need to be lost in a life of lying before the possibility of deliverance from hell presents itself. We have to learn how to avoid the moment and control our experience of the world through wishing, hoping, being lost in memory, lying and being lost in our minds. We have to be successful at this and despair of it and then escape from it without losing its advantages. All of that learning, all of that schooling in evaluation, was just a trick. After it has totally lost its value, it becomes of some use.

These fantasies about the future, based on the past, are the hope and hype we con ourselves with. Even if we get what we always wanted it never looks like we thought it would when it arrives. Success, therefore, leads to disillusionment. As Ecclesiastes says, "All is vanity and a striving after the wind." We end up in hell again. Our memories of heaven are what make hell possible. Only after years at this can we begin to give up faith in our own fantasies.

When the left brain confronts the nonlinear dimension, it keeps circling around, breaking wholes into parts, retracing its data, and asking inappropriate questions, like a reporter at a funeral. Where, when, how, why? We have to inhibit its questions for the moment, suspend its judgment, or we cannot 'see' the other dimension, any more than we can see both perspectives of an optical illusion staircase at the same time—or be swept away by a symphony while analyzing the composition."4

When the left brain confronts the nonlinear dimension, it keeps circling around, breaking wholes into parts, retracing its data, and asking inappropriate questions, like a reporter at a funeral. Where, when, how, why? We have to inhibit its questions for the moment, suspend its judgment, or we cannot 'see' the other dimension, any more than we can see both perspectives of an optical illusion staircase at the same time—or be swept away by a symphony while analyzing the composition."

For some, that death is the kind that comes when you start a worm farm. For others, that death is an ego death, and it makes room for the rebirth of aliveness. The dying that brings rebirth comes about as a result of learning how to tell the truth.

Loving a belief is like loving a teddy bear. Defending beliefs as though they were sacred only demonstrates your stupidity.

The dirty little secret is out of the bag now. Your conscience is the devil. The revolution of our times is the revolution of consciousness. The government to be overthrown is the government of conscience, with its bureaucracy of moralism. Conscience inhibits being. We are developing our awareness to beat the devil.

The dirty little secret is out of the bag now. Your conscience is the devil. The revolution of our times is the revolution of consciousness. The government to be overthrown is the government of conscience, with its bureaucracy of moralism.

Being willing does not mean you never play the game of judgment. Being aware does not mean you have no conscience. The difference is in flex. As you may have noticed, I particularly love playing the game of judgment and condemnation of the Catholic church. I love my experience of rightness and righteous indignation about those poor assholes. I like the experience just like any other righteous prick, Catholics included. The difference is I have more to sustain me than my beliefs, mostly from luck rather than virtue on my part. I have been lucky. These poor suffering bastards who never grew out of pre-adolescent moralism, that make up the iron-fisted keepers of the rules the world over, believe in their beliefs and will kill rather than face dying to their beliefs. Priests and generals and rigid revolutionaries are in need of Christ events for delivery from the deadly seriousness of their games. The dirty little secret is out of the bag now. Your conscience is the devil. The revolution of our times is the revolution of consciousness. The government to be overthrown is the government of conscience, with its bureaucracy of moralism. Conscience inhibits being. We

What I think Kierkegaard meant, when he said "a person who relates to another person and relates also to that relationship relates thereby to God,"2 is that a consciousness relating consciously to another consciousness relates to consciousness its own self. We all (Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, psychotherapists, lovers) agree on this.

What I think Kierkegaard meant, when he said "a person who relates to another person and relates also to that relationship relates thereby to God,"2 is that a consciousness relating consciously to another consciousness relates to consciousness its own self.

God is the sense of willingness. God is the involuntary nervous system in your body that keeps everything running regardless of what you think. You relate to God by being aware. You relate to God by becoming who you are, which is an awareness. You relate to God by becoming God. When you are most aware of relating to another being you are most in touch with God. God is the collective involuntary nervous systems of people. God is the ineffable experience of awareness of being related to another. God is receiving yourself and another person in being, as you are, in any moment. God is the eternal split-second soundlight being. God is when what is so, objectively, is subjectively experienced. Awareness is the key practice for the experience of Godness.

God is the sense of willingness. God is the involuntary nervous system in your body that keeps everything running regardless of what you think. You relate to God by being aware. You relate to God by becoming who you are, which is an awareness. You relate to God by becoming God. When you are most aware of relating to another being you are most in touch with God. God is the collective involuntary nervous systems of people. God is the ineffable experience of awareness of being related to another. God is receiving yourself and another person in being, as you are, in any moment. God is the eternal split-second soundlight being. God is when what is so, objectively, is subjectively experienced. Awareness is the key

Being right is not the most important thing in life. If it was, you might as well kill yourself. Being willing is what counts. If we are willing, we are fools, as any good mind will tell you. Exactly. Fools rush in and learn all kinds of things angels will never know.

Integrity, wholeness, at-one-ness, is the opposite of moralism. Having integrity is the opposite of being moral. If one has integrity, one doesn't need morals. People with integrity operate with rules of thumb, not morals. Integrity both results from and is a manifestation of telling the truth.

We are all moralists. The more moralistic we are, the more hysterical we are. The more hysterical we are, the further away from experience we wish to be.

Being trapped in the jail of the mind is a disease called moralism. All relief from moralism is temporary because there is no permanent cure. The use of drugs like alcohol can provide short-term, temporary relief, like using Alka Seltzer for an upset stomach. Telling the truth is more like a timerelease capsule that lasts for days or weeks, or like an exercise and diet program that works to improve your strength and resistance over a period of time.

Having told the truth enough, the being becomes liberated from its own mind. Having told the truth enough, the being takes charge of its mind, rather than remaining suppressed by its mind.

Having told the truth enough, the being becomes liberated from its own mind.

T he full path of growth from birth to maturity consists of: I, the birth of being, 2. the growth of the mind, 3. a period of domination of the being by the mind, 4. liberation of the being from the mind, and finally 5. a mind used by the being.

One of the benefits of having a mind is that this phenomenon occurs: once you know what you are looking for, it starts to show up.

Where to Look for People Who Are Interested in the Truth When we commit ourselves to something beyond the campaign for righteousness, we are missionaries for liberation. To return to my original point, we then need to find a missionary group of people who are working to save people from their beliefs. In joining such a group to help save others from their minds we may get saved occasionally from our own.

Beliefs about how we should behave are all bullshit. There is no way for us to do the right thing. Thinking we are doing the right thing is a part of the illusion of being in control. When you place your faith in your own judgment, you place your faith in your judge. You get to believing that your judge is who you are. Catholic parochial education is a perfect model for teaching children that their superegos are who they are. Investment in that belief is the antithesis of healthy aliveness. As a psychotherapist, curing Catholicism is one of the biggest challenges I have. If I put that on an insurance form as a diagnosis, the insurance company won't pay for my services, so I use terminology from another model: "anxiety neurosis." One of the worst and most resistant strains of anxiety neurosis is implanted by the Catholic Church because they teach young children that the most important thing in life is being right. Almost all of South America is an exemplary backwater of Catholicism. The Catholic Church is by no means the only source of this teaching, it's just that they are particularly good at it. But we all suffer from varying degrees of this "catholic" disease. It is a milestone in growing up to get this: there is no way to be right. There is no right way to behave. There is no way to know you have done the right thing. There is no way to know if what you are planning to do is right. If you got the abortion, was it the right thing? If you had the baby, was it right? You do what you do. You did what you did. The right and the wrong of it are not worth spending a lot of time on.

Beliefs about how we should behave are all bullshit. There is no way for us to do the right thing. Thinking we are doing the right thing is a part of the illusion of being in control. When you place your faith in your own judgment, you place your faith in your judge. You get to believing that your judge is who you are. Catholic parochial education is a perfect model for teaching children that their superegos are who they are. Investment in that belief is the antithesis of healthy aliveness. As a psychotherapist, curing Catholicism is one of the biggest challenges I have. If I put that on an insurance form as a diagnosis, the insurance company won't pay for my services, so I use terminology from another model: "anxiety neurosis." One of the worst and most resistant strains of anxiety neurosis is implanted by the Catholic Church because they teach young children that the most important thing in life is being right. Almost all of South America is an exemplary backwater of Catholicism. The Catholic Church is by no means the only source of this teaching, it's just that they are particularly good at it. But we all suffer from varying degrees of this "catholic" disease. It is a milestone in growing up to get this: there is no way to be right. There is no right way to behave. There is no way to know you have done the right thing. There is no way to know if what you are planning to do is right. If you got the abortion, was it the right thing? If you had the baby, was it right? You do what you do. You did what you did.

A freely functioning, creative being is one who has "severed constricting bonds to the past." When the mind discovers that the past is dead, and furthermore, that all is dying, energy is eventually freed up for some project toward the future.

The "giving up" that comes with the acceptance of one's own death and the futility of proving one's worth allows for freedom.

Psychotherapy works like a death announcement: like a doctor telling you that you have only six months to live. The message is "You're not going to live forever and you won't be able to do most of the things you want to do before you die and there is very damn little you're in charge of anyway." If the client gets that message, it can considerably shorten the length of time it takes to conduct psychotherapy.

One way we shed attachment to who we think we are is to face death.

In order to be fully alive, we have to constantly shed attachment to ideas from the past and about, the future. The biggest, fattest idea to ditch first, in order to be creative, is the idea of who we are.

Allowing yourself to feel bad gets you over it, particularly if at the same time you unload a bunch of secrets. If you are worried your mother-in-law will find out you smoke pot, tell her. You won't have that worry anymore, you'll feel better, you'll get some new problems, and you may find out that more is permissible that you've ever imagined.

A major focus of any worthwhile psychotherapy is an attempt to reawaken this ability to get lost in experience, by reawakening noticing. One of the first things to notice is that worry and fantasy, which are twins, have captured all of your attention. The second thing to notice is that when you aren't worrying or fantasizing there is still something left.

When we are trying to protect and preserve our image of who we are, much of our time is spent in worrying. When we try to improve our image, much of our time is spent in fantasy. A lot of us get to the place where worry or fantasy are the only two choices we have. You go crazy when worry and fantasy are your only two options.

Beliefs About Who We Think We Are In order to render ourselves fit for such a community of acceptance of multivariant weirdos, we need to destroy who we think we are. Who we generally think we are is our "reputations to ourselves." We think we are our memory of our past actions, attitudes, and remembered records. That's not who we are, but it takes a lot of learning and energy to discover that, just as it took a lot of energy and learning to build that picture for ourselves in the first place. The energy required for being who we really are—full persons—comes from burning all the bullshit beliefs you built your mind out of. Fortunately, since one's mind is a constant bullshit generator, there is an unlimited supply of fuel.

It may feel less secure than if everyone agrees on what is true, but the feeling of security is just that—a feeling, not the real thing. Less secure is often more reliable. If there is not enough variety preserved in the gardens of illusion about "how things are," then some version of 1984 totalitarianism will come true.

It may feel less secure than if everyone agrees on what is true, but the feeling of security is just that—a feeling, not the real thing. Less secure is often more reliable.

We need a variety of ways to look at how things are, because ultimately we have a better chance of supporting each other with a lot of ways of viewing things.

None of us are ever really looking at how it is out there. I have my view of "how things are." You have your view of "how things are." We have to depend, in case of disagreement, on another nut like ourselves (a friend, therapist, or judge) with some other view of "how things are" to arbitrate for us. And it's no accident that "arbitrate" comes from the same root word as arbitrary. The truth is, none of us ever know what is going on. We just agree to have beliefs in common as a way of keeping things together. It's amazing how we copy each other's views so 'well that we can have such organized living. It's also pretty amazing how groups of us are willing to defend to the death our interpretations against other groups' interpretations, or punish "crooked" interpretations within our own groups. It's amazing because there is really no way to tell if "out there" is out there or not. But whatever it is, it's all created by individual beings, who then get together and agree what to call it. Assuming that seeing, hearing, smelling and so on are chemical reactions in organisms, then each individual organism, as I argued in Chapter One, is the creator of the world. We have to see if our creations agree with each other by doing a lot of crosschecking in the course of growing up. Even then, just at the perceptual level, it's hard to get agreement among people about what the world really is and what it is like. Science is a formal attempt to agree on the criteria we are willing to accept as a basis of agreement, in advance of any agreements. In that way the laws and agreed-upon assumptions of science are just like the laws and agreed-upon assumptions of the U.S. Constitution. We humans have spent a lot of time and energy for the past several thousand years trying to get clear on our agreements about perception and our agreements about value. People kill each other by the minute over what it all means. The solution probably won't ever be just having everyone believe the same thing. Instead of working toward commonality of views, we need to work toward common acceptance of the principle of variety.

None of us are ever really looking at how it is out there. I have my view of "how things are." You have your view of "how things are." We have to depend, in case of disagreement, on another nut like ourselves (a friend, therapist, or judge) with some other view of "how things are" to arbitrate for us. And it's no accident that "arbitrate" comes from the same root word as arbitrary. The truth is, none of us ever know what is going on. We just agree to have beliefs in common as a way of keeping things together. It's amazing how we copy each other's views so 'well that we can have such organized living. It's also pretty amazing how groups of us are willing to defend to the death our interpretations against other groups' interpretations, or punish "crooked" interpretations within our own groups. It's amazing because there is really no way to tell if "out there" is out there or not. But whatever it is, it's all created by individual beings, who then get together and agree what to call it. Assuming that seeing, hearing, smelling and so on are chemical reactions in organisms, then each individual organism, as I argued in Chapter One, is the creator of the world. We have to see if our creations agree with each other by doing a lot of crosschecking in the course of growing up. Even then, just at the perceptual level, it's hard to get agreement among people about what the world really is and what it is like. Science is a formal attempt to agree on the criteria we are willing to accept as a basis of agreement, in advance of any agreements. In that way the laws and agreed-upon assumptions of science are just like the laws and agreed-upon assumptions of the U.S. Constitution. We humans have spent a lot of time and energy for the past several thousand years trying to get clear on our agreements about perception and our agreements about value. People kill each other by the minute over what it all means. The solution probably won't ever be just having everyone believe the same thing. Instead of working toward commonality of views, we need to work toward common

None of us are ever really looking at how it is out there. I have my view of "how things are." You have your view of "how things are." We have to depend, in case of disagreement, on another nut like ourselves (a friend, therapist, or judge) with some other view of "how things are" to arbitrate for us. And it's no accident that "arbitrate" comes from the same root word as arbitrary. The truth is, none of us ever know what is going on. We just agree to have beliefs in common as a way of keeping things together. It's amazing how we copy each other's views so 'well that we can have such organized living.

When either love or hate dies, love can be born again. That is particularly good news, and may be what Jesus was talking about. It's probably the meaning of the Resurrection: love dies to be reborn. When we let die our attachments to remembrances, expectations, moral imperatives, evaluations, comparisons, self-images, beliefs about how others should behave, ideals, and even romance, we make ourselves clearings for love's rebirth. Love is being wide open to the present, not blocked by nostalgia for some memory of the past or anticipation of some new love of the future. Love of another person happens only in a moment. Love is never having to say anything.

When either love or hate dies, love can be born again. That is particularly good news, and may be what Jesus was talking about. It's probably the meaning of the Resurrection: love dies to be reborn. When we let die our attachments to remembrances, expectations, moral imperatives, evaluations, comparisons, self-images, beliefs about how others should behave, ideals, and even romance, we make ourselves clearings for love's rebirth. Love is being wide open to the present, not blocked by nostalgia for some memory of the past or anticipation of some new love of the future.

As I mentioned before, when we humans figured out the idea of hauling off our refuse it saved more lives than anything else in the history of medicine. We can do the same now with the garbage of the mind. Expectations, plans, and hopes for the future will still voice themselves, but instead of becoming overwhelmed, we can focus on choosing a few and discarding the rest, and then acting only on what we have chosen. The good news is that when we choose, act, and let ourselves be, the yammering voice of infinite choice fades. It may still be there, but its hold over us dies.

We are all very busy these days. Technology run amok creates new possibilities by the dozens every day. It's a lot of fun, but we wear ourselves out trying to experience everything when everything is too plentiful to be experienced. You and I are always missing something and wishing we weren't, and always feeling that real life is where we're not. Whenever we are doing anything we are missing everything else. Commercials in our own minds constantly whisper to us of something else we should be doing: watching TV, playing the guitar, going out to eat, playing video games, sitting on the front deck, sitting on the back deck, eating food, drinking alcohol, smoking dope, having a meeting, playing golf, running, working, etc. This whisper goes on day and night: a background conscientiousness that bugs the shit out of us. It says, "While you are doing this, you are missing all the rest." How do you calm down enough to re-contact being in the midst of all this? I constantly fret about books and movies I miss, or am missing, or might miss, or should not miss. How much more is there to know than I will ever learn? It boggles the mind. I am greedy—I am hysterically greedy—I am so impatient, I am hardly here at all. There is already more to be learned than can be learned. The accumulation of other human beings' creative products now available to us has amounted to more than we can ever use. It's pointless for us to avail ourselves of all learning opportunities, or of all activities of interest. We freeze up from trying not to die in too many ways. We have to let go of possibilities for the future as well as memories from the past. We burn out from holding on to possibilities for the future, in just the same way we deaden ourselves by trying to hold on to and live up to images and values from the past. We work just as hysterically to keep the future alive as we do when we try Co keep the past alive. We are paralyzed at the point of choice: we cannot say "yes" for all the "no"s required in order to do so. We can't orient ourselves without dreams, and we choke the life out of ourselves when we are trapped in them. We even have dreams about what never was but could be, and then compare how we live to those ideal dreams. We need dreams to furnish ourselves with ideas for action, but remain paralyzed in inaction. On the one hand we get a little peace now and then, when we escape our mind's constant evaluation, and on the other we need that constant reassessment to get on in the world and to get the things we want. Then, ■when we do create something, it never lives up to the dream from which it came. Buddha was right, the suffering is built in. If we don't rescue ourselves from our intense attachment to too many expectations, we'll continue to be controlled by the anxiety of multiple choices—going crazy from too many options. Dreamjam. We'll go numb from possibilities. Every time you make up your mind to say yes to one thing you have to decide at the same time to say no to forty others. Saying no to forty possibilities just to say yes to one is a pain in the ass. How did we get to dreamjam? Does it have anything to do with what is real? How did we get so far removed from necessity to become completely lost in the conversations of the mind? Resistance to limiting the future by commitment —to one project to the exclusion of others, or to one person to the exclusion of others—is the sickness of our time. The mind wants either the certainty of its own tradition, or it wants the hope of limitless accomplishment in the future. Thus the mind imposes limits and hates limitations. We are hoist on our own petards. We are damned if we do and damned if we don't, forever trapped by our attempts to revivify the past or vivify a new future that excludes other possibilities. How do we rescue ourselves? We have to acknowledge the built-in nature of our suffering—accept both the voice that tells us we're not doing enough and the fact that we will never be able to do all that we want to do—and act anyway. We must accept and affirm the sacrifice of alternatives and take the pain. There are no short cuts,

So the first thing you want to do to keep alive is find a "missionary group" that is going about the business of liberation from the mind. The future of your therapy and of therapy itself is in community. A community organized around people helping themselves and other people be liberated from their minds is your best bet. These groups provide a service not only to each other, but to people who could well use their services but don't know it yet. The kind of group I recommend is one in which the people don't seem to be in too big of a hurry.

It should come as no surprise that I recommend helping other people as a method of staying awake. Since memorizing the idea of liberation kills liberation, you have to do something other than memorize and remember to keep being liberated. What keeps you liberated is interaction with other people interested in staying in contact with their fundamental nature as beings, and being honored by the opportunity they provide you when they allow you to contribute to them in this way.

We are against politeness as a substitute for the truth because that politeness kills. Politeness and diplomacy are responsible for more suffering and death than all the crimes of passion in history. Fuck politeness. Fuck diplomacy. Tell the truth.

this being would only be in a marriage as a matter of choice and not as a matter of security. She wouldn't be engaged in a relationship based on a promise from the other person not to hurt her feelings. That expanded-to-the-width-of-the-witness being is capable of saying "I'm here on this planet for experiencing and I want to be a. creator, not a victim. I'm willing to learn and keep learning. I am willing to experiment with life. I am more interested in discovery than carefulness. I can depend on my alertness more than my certainty that I'm right. I am more interested in learning than in protection."

That witness sits quietly, being the context within which the mind struggles and oppresses itself. The mind's primary interest is control, while the witness is more interested in revelation than in control. The witness is always there, but often when people first come to see me in therapy, suffering from the oppression of their own minds, that witness is so surrounded by mind-stuff that both the being and the mind are dying.

When one has learned to appreciate freedom, the world becomes a place of creation, rather than a mind-smothered place. The mind becomes the enemy that has been defeated and made an ally.

It is the way things are, and it is fine that they are that way. It's more fun and less boring than trying to keep track of everything. It's called freedom.

They were blissfully together for a three-day weekend in March, they made love seven times, they feasted on love and were happier than either could remember ever having been. They wanted to hold on to that remembered bliss. They wanted to do whatever they could to take care of each other and to express gratitude and work to keep that love alive. They didn't ever want that to change. Now and then they had some experiences together that didn't quite live up to that standard. Trying to make it all like it used to be eventually devolved into an obligation for which they began to resent each other.

You'd like for other people to imagine you the way you want them to. You spend a lot of time sculpting your image in the eyes and minds of others. It is an interesting game, but if it becomes the point of living it is a waste of life.

Self-image vs. Self What are we talking about when we speak of our "selves"? What do the words mean with which we try to describe our so-called "selves"? My own self is indescribable. So is yours. My description of myself is not my self anymore than a description of a rose is a rose. As Tim Gallwey says in the Inner Game of Golf: "A self-image is only a picture of a real self. Just as a photograph is a two-dimensional representation of something three dimensional and cannot capture every detail or perspective of the object itself, our self-image can never encompass our true potential."4 Having an image of who we are and how we should behave is a great constraint on us. Escape from the mind happens in spite of, rather than because of, our self-image, whether it's a good one or a bad one.

every detail or perspective of the object itself,

Thus, category systems from the past eat us alive. They destroy our aliveness by capturing all of our attention so that we starve to death, without noticing our hunger for simple contact with people and everyday experience. After being sufficiently lost in the nest of categories, we never meet anyone new. We only meet representatives of people we used to know.

As we learn categories for the sake of efficiency, we learn at the same time to avoid experience. A one-year-old child sits in the yard and looks up at an airplane flying over. The child listens to the plane's sound, watches the sun glint on the wings, observes it proceed, watches the jet trail, keeps watching the jet trail after the plane has disappeared. The airplane gets his undivided attention. When that same child is about three years old, he will look up, see the plane, say to himself, "Oh yeah, an airplane," and then look down and go about his business. By this time, he has learned to categorize the experience of watching and listening to the airplane so that he no longer has to watch and listen. Noticing an airplane and applying the category "airplane," he then withdraws his attention from his experience of the airplane and puts it somewhere else. The ability to do this enhances his efficiency. Almost all of us become more efficient in this way. Otherwise, we'd spend all our lives looking at airplanes. The problem is that we begin to treat people, who are highly unpredictable phenomena, the same way that we treat the highly predictable phenomenon of an airplane flight. The result is that sometimes people we know do something new and unpredictable after we have stopped watching and are only manipulating a category they represent. We then end up missing a lot that is new in the world.

Growing Beyond the Developmental Stage of Learning How to Lie It is okay that we all learned to lie. Learning how to lie and to withhold is a necessary developmental stage, crucial to getting on in life and getting around in the world. Cognitive and personality development cannot occur without developing essential lying skills. We learn to condense experience, and we then all, individually, experience the problem of reductionism. Lying is a result of reductionism—the condensation of memory and the categorization of experience we naturally learn while growing up. When we start thinking with categories, we exclude a lot of experience; yet, we need the efficiency of thinking with categories.

In Sanskrit, there is a form of embodying all there is to be known about any area of study into 100 sutras, or verses. These are short phrases, limited to about a two-line statement, organized in a specific form. The first sutra says what these sutras are all about. For example if we were to put the whole body of knowledge we call physics into one hundred statements, the first statement would be, "These are the sutras of Physics." Then we would have 99 statements left to cover all of physics. The second sutra is designated as the most comprehensive overview of the whole of the work and practices of the area under consideration. In our example, we would be expected, in the second sutra, to say in one statement what all of physics is about. Patanjali, after Yoga had been around for a few thousand years, wrote the Yoga Sutras. By the time he wrote the Yoga Sutras, many different methods for the practice of Yoga had been developed: Karma Yoga, Bakti Yoga, Tantric Yoga, Kundalini Yoga, Hatha Yoga and so on. These yogas of service, love, sex, work, physical health, and the philosophy of yoga had all undergone literally thousands of years of development. The second sutra of the Yoga Sutras, the one that most comprehensively covers its subject, says, "The objective of all Yoga is to bring about an inhibition of the modifications of the mind."3 [emphasis mine]. The modifications of the mind are memories, principles, conclusions, morals, and beliefs. Telling the truth is the particular "yog'tr" practice necessary in our time to inhibit them.

In promoting inhibition of domination by the mind, I am not talking about something new in history, just something relatively new to western history. Yoga, which means yoke—that which connects together intellect and spirit, or being and mind—is primarily concerned with exactly the topic we are now considering. In the millennia-old philosophy and practice of yoga, as summarized in the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, countering the mind's distortions is given the highest priority.

You and I think we have learned from experience, and that it is important to remember those lessons. We do learn from experience, but those lessons are not as helpful as we think. What we most frequently do is make bad recordings of distortions of experience and get off on feeling smug about them. These recordings become the jail of the mind. This memory jail needs to be inhibited rather than inhabited.

Coming alive always feels like dying, because you are giving up your previous conceptual orientation—your previous personality —for a new and uncertain beginning.

To rephrase Cole's text: People have trouble living because they have trouble thinking; they have trouble thinking because they don't perceive with their senses; and they don't perceive with their senses because they don't interrupt their minds' constant reshuffling of worn-out but familiar concepts. The same difficulty is at the root of their difficulty in. being husbands, wives, fathers, sons, daughters, friends, and lovers.

William Coles, a teacher of creative writing, says of his students: "Students have trouble writing, after all, because they have trouble reading; they have trouble reading because they don't hear; and they don't hear because they don't take time to listen. The same difficulty, by the way, is at the root of the trouble they have at being engineers or biologists or English majors or citizens or parents or sons or husbands."

To rephrase Cole's text: People have trouble living because they have trouble thinking; they have trouble thinking because they don't perceive with their senses; and they don't perceive with their senses because they don't interrupt their minds' constant reshuffling of worn-out but familiar concepts.

William Coles, a teacher of creative writing, says of his students: "Students have trouble writing, after all, because they have trouble reading; they have trouble reading because they don't hear; and they don't hear because they don't take time to listen

Surviving vs. Being Alive We all have trouble staying alive as opposed to just surviving. Usually, unless something catastrophic occurs, we stay in a conceptual world, and we have trouble really perceiving. We don't perceive because we choose the comfort and security of what we already "know" over the ambiguity of experience.

I'm interested in a conversation about our conversation that includes the possibility of living as a creator consciously. When I engage in a conversation in which I create a connection with another person through listening, I want to speak to the creator of that conversation. I want to talk with the creator being, and I want to talk about creation. People interested m creation notice that what they notice changes. A change in noticing leads to escape from the selffulfilling prophecy of the previous self-and-world-view, and leads into a new world, and this occurs over and over again.

The point is that, regardless of therapists' judgments, people have already worked out, and will continue to work out, their ways of being m the world. But their contact with the world changes when they are contacted. The truth changes for them through being heard. One creator of the world is in conversation with another.

"Thinking that the self must remain constant for life to have meaning is like falling hopelessly in love with an inch." —Alan Watts

This is hard to do. You have to die to live. Your "pretend" self, that doesn't include your imperfection, has to die. Then, you again become a whole being. You then have the power you have always had, only now you can use it consciously. This is the good life. It requires that you sacrifice the pleasure of crying yourself to sleep on a greasy mattress.

This is hard to do. You have to die to live. Your "pretend" self, that doesn't include your imperfection, has to die. Then, you again become a whole being. You then have the power you have always had, only now you can use it consciously. This is the good life. It requires that you sacrifice the pleasure of crying yourself to sleep on a greasy mattress.

This is at the heart of Buddhism, Yoga, Vedantic Philosophy, Christian salvation, and other forms and practices of enlightenment. When a Zen Buddhist sits and looks at a wall for fourteen hours a day for seven days in a row, he does it to be able to sit and look at a wall. To be able to sit and look at a wall and just sit and look at a wall is enlightenment. To sit and look at your life story like you would sit and look at a wall is to recontact your source in the same way.

Commitment must be based on the awareness of what is, and on the willingness to be responsible for ourselves the way we are. That means if we are imperfect beings who make mistakes, break our word, get angry, and are selfish, greedy, petty, and unfair, we must make our commitment as those imperfect beings. We spend our lives waiting to get better so that we can accept ourselves. We refuse to enjoy life, refuse to accept that we are loved and forgiven, and refuse to tell the truth about who we are because we never quite meet our own standards. Perfectionists are people who would rather be the worst than be the second-best. Everyone who ever successfully made a change that worked and served as a platform for the next, did this first: they finally accepted themselves the way they were. They gave up the struggle to get better. Then, finally, they were free to change.

What has been unclear in our culture is what to do when you're not committed to anything but struggle. When we feel powerless to keep our word, eventually we stop giving it. Your wholeness—the experience of yourself the way you are —must precede commitment, because to be anything less than your whole self is to be trapped in the morass of beliefs you have about who you are based on your case history.

We all know that commitment is essential to creation.

One of these games is called, "Okay, okay, I'm guilty." This game is to make it look like you have taken responsibility for yourself when you haven't. Admitting you are guilty is a great way to avoid being responsible. There is a big difference between admitting you are guilty of failure, or "copping a plea," and really owning your power as the creator of your life. Whether you feel guilty or not is irrelevant. Admitting you are wrong or were wrong is only a prelude to taking responsibility for your life. It is not enough. You have to make a commitment after you interrupt this game. After you acknowledge that you've been fooling yourself by trying hard, you have to make a public declaration of what you will now be responsible for creating. Stick your neck out. Put your ass on the line. Tell everybody what you are about, and by when you will get results, and ask them to help.

Responsibility Responsibility means that whatever you are doing, you are willing to experience yourself as the cause. You are the source of your troubles as well as of your successes. Wherever you are on the way to reaching your goals—whether you are cruising along, pulled over to the side of the road, or feel like you're going backwards—the willingness to experience yourself as responsible is the crucial element of success. As long as you are blaming, explaining, apologizing, trying, resolving to be good, hoping or feeling guilty, you are not being responsible.

In sports, this magic fascinates us by the millions as observers and by the hundreds of thousands as participants. The most incredible performances, that take everything a person has, have the grace of effortless nonchalance. We all have areas of our lives in which we work in this effortless, powerfully creative way, and other areas in which we struggle impotently without results. Those whose creative power has been unavailable to them in an area they want to change can rediscover this power of intention when they seriously take responsibility for creating their whole lives right now, including their phony smokescreen struggle.

In sports, this magic fascinates us by the millions as observers and by the hundreds of thousands as participants. The most incredible performances, that take everything a person has, have the grace of effortless nonchalance. We all have areas of our lives in which we work in this effortless, powerfully creative way, and other areas in which we struggle impotently without results. Those whose creative power has been unavailable to them in an area they want to change can rediscover this power of intention when they seriously take responsibility for creating their whole lives right now, including their phony smokescreen struggle.

Like obscenity, intention is hard to define, but easy to recognize. Each of us has had experiences of effortless change or accomplishment—results that we produced so effortlessly, and often against such odds, that it seemed almost as though they were done through us instead of by us. It's not that they weren't' difficult or challenging. It's that we were somehow free to confront the tasks, to throw the full force of our minds and bodies into them, rather than somehow, inexplicably, held back from within. Intention that calmly comes from wholeness is like that. People who have had such an experience often remark, "I don't really know how I did it. I just did it. I guess I was just ready." They didn't experience having control over themselves in quite the way that we imagine "will power" or "self-control" to work; yet there was never a question about their commitment to continue. It's as though the strength of their intention actually eliminated the need for self-control because they were no longer fighting themselves. It would have required more effort to stop than to continue. Once some decision was made in the quiet, private sanctuary of the self, by the whole person, and once the world was informed of that decision, bringing about the certain outcome was only a matter of time.

Intention When we are locked in a losing battle for self-control, our attempts to change are marked by effort and by "trying." When we are whole, the power of our intention becomes available to us. What is being whole? What do I mean by "intention"? Being whole means including everything. Being whole includes the experience of eternal time after the light came on in the womb, the experiences of differentiation and individuation that come ■with growing up, the current electrical current we are this moment, all our imaginings, and facing death. Being this wholeness allows for intention to be possible.

The abysmal truth is that everything comes to nothing.

Struggling to change is what you do to hide from something worse. Struggling to change is a way to avoid facing the abyss, and if the abyss could be avoided, it would be a good idea.

In order for things to get better, they must first get worse. In order to get out of debt, we have to acknowledge how it serves us to be in debt. In order to lose weight, we have to be in touch with, and confront, how we also want to stay fat. We have to stop paying attention to our struggle and turn our awareness to the ways in which these circumstances we claim we want to change serve us—the payoffs. Only after experiencing ourselves the way we are, dropping our phony struggle to change, and telling the truth about all of it, can we create the lives we have been saying we want.

As complete, integrated human beings, we direct our lives with purpose, with effortless control, and with unchecked power. This is scary. The contradictions between our principles and our behavior are only superficial, only invented for the sake of appearance and to avoid acknowledging our terrifying power to make things happen. Our unwillingness to explore the possibility that what we have is what we want—that our lives function, that we are comfortable and fear change in most areas of our lives—prevents us from producing change in other areas. Our energy is totally invested in maintaining our lives the way they are, and the phony struggle for change only conceals the ways in which the status quo serves us. Our apparent battle for change is a tempest in a teapot. As long as I identify my "self only as that desire to change and not also as a presently more powerful desire to remain the same, I will remain stuck. In a sense, I can change, finally, only by giving up trying to change.

As complete, integrated human beings, we direct our lives with purpose, with effortless control, and with unchecked power. This is scary. The contradictions between our principles and our behavior are only superficial, only invented for the sake of appearance and to avoid acknowledging our terrifying power to make things happen. Our unwillingness to explore the possibility that what we have is what we want—that our lives function, that we are comfortable and fear change in most areas of our lives—prevents us from producing change in other areas. Our energy is totally invested in maintaining our lives the way they are, and the phony struggle for change only conceals the ways in which the status quo serves us. Our apparent battle for change is a tempest in a teapot. As long as I identify my "self only as that desire to change and not also as a presently more powerful desire to remain the same, I will remain stuck.

But until I can experience my own resistance as "me" just as I experience my desire to change as "me," I am doomed to be locked in the hopeless struggle for control, Tom was absolutely right about the one-eyed man: "Ya jus' askin' for it. Ya like it. Lets ya feel sorry for yaself."

We always manage to stay one step ahead of ourselves, so that we never quite reach our goals. By focusing on the struggle instead of on the results, we avoid having to admit that the one who wants to change and the one who resists change are one and the same, that we are whole, and that we really do get what we want—which is struggle, rather than results.

We always manage to stay one step ahead of ourselves, so that we never quite reach our goals.

You pretend that the "real" you is the one that "wants to." We pretend that we are not whole. The "I" who wants to get up early every morning and exercise, for instance, seems to be a different individual from the "I" who decides to sleep in. The "I" who longs for a successful, supportive marriage is not the "I" who backs down from making a commitment whenever a relationship gets too serious. Instead of examining more closely the actual way in which we operate, which consists of "trying" to get what we want and then sabotaging our own efforts, we assume our error is in not trying hard enough, and redouble both our efforts and our resistance.

By focusing our attention on our apparent struggle to change—the reasons and explanations and excuses that we generate instead of results—we engage in a conspiracy to pretend that we are each an accidental grouping of disharmonious parts working against each other. Why "parts"? When you say, "I want to look for a new job, but I can't seem to get started," who is it that "wants to" and who is it that "can't"? It is as though there were two of you and one—the one who "can't"—had more power than the other.

The source of our power to produce the results we want does not lie in our beliefs, our hopes, or our time-consuming struggle to change. The person who says he wants to lose weight, but says he just can't give up midnight snacks, may believe he is in a struggle between "being good" and "giving THINGS LEARNED FROM THE WAR BETJ-VEEN BEING & MIND in" to his cravings, but in fact he has already chosen to keep snacking. The "struggle" that he describes serves to hide this fact.

The source of our power to produce the results we want does not lie in our beliefs, our hopes, or our time-consuming struggle to change. The person who says he wants to lose weight, but says he just can't give up midnight snacks, may believe he is in a struggle between "being good" and "giving THINGS LEARNED FROM THE WAR BETJ-VEEN BEING & MIND in" to his cravings, but in fact he has already chosen to keep snacking. The "struggle" that he describes serves to

When people view themselves as conglomerations of opposing forces, each force straining in a different direction with each particular component striving to wrest control from the others and dominate the future, the result is a sense of helplessness.

"Climate is what we expect. Weather is what we get."

When a person learns to use his or her own mind for creating, rather than being used by that mind, the job of psychotherapy is over.

What fools us into being neurotic is the desire to hold on to some experiences and to avoid others.

Life becomes a game for the sake of the game alone. The act of wishing is itself transformed. Nietzsche said, "A man's maturity consists in having found again the seriousness one had as a child at play."1 That serious play, that paying attention first and then thinking-directed-by-attention, that utter dedication to being with whatever you are doing, is a way of being we have known since the light first came on in the womb.

Life becomes a game for the sake of the game alone. The act of wishing is itself transformed. Nietzsche said, "A man's maturity consists in having found again the seriousness one had as a child at play."

These orders, given in a shrill internal tone of voice, were built in with feelings of shame at eight years of age or earlier. When we are not unthinkingly obeying that voice, we handle our daily, physical, basic, on-going existence with energy left over and worry decreased, and we are able to get in touch with our power as creators.

The figure in the foreground, the mind-bound, harried, "shouldistic" warrior, moves to the background—still alive and well and whole, but no longer leading—and the heretofore background figure, the quiet animal who walks and laughs, taking what's so in nature, comes to the foreground—even in the city, and even at work. Such a shift is a matter of grace and strikes only those in good-feeling shape who are ready to receive it.

The figure in the foreground, the mind-bound, harried, "shouldistic" warrior, moves to the background—still alive and well and whole, but no longer leading—

The experiencer normally blocked by moralistic resolve will then gradually come to the foreground, and the moralism, while remaining intact, will recede to the background.

Therapy consists primarily of teaching people how to recontact the experience that exists below their moralism, or below ideas about how life is and how it should be.

The hardest part of what we do is the characterological part—the therapy to change the way the person runs him- or herself. The ways we all learned to get satisfaction that worked at eight years of age become increasingly less appropriate as we grow older, but the unconscious mind doesn't get the message. Insights gained in childhood become principles of control for living the "right life" as an adult. But people have to get over childhood in order to grow up. Growing up is not just a continual accumulation of new learning: you have to ditch some of what you learned before. One particularly effective way to do this is to tell the truth about all your attempts to manipulate others to get what you want. Until you can laugh about this, you aren't free from being manipulated by your own manipulations. It is only through telling the truth about all these hidden agendas for getting what you want that the real work of growing begins.

The hardest part of what we do is the characterological part—the therapy to change the way the person runs him- or herself. The ways we all learned to get satisfaction that worked at eight years of age become increasingly less appropriate as we grow older, but the unconscious mind doesn't get the message. Insights gained in childhood become principles of control for living the "right life" as an adult. But people have to get over childhood in order to grow up.

They have also learned something about how resistance causes pain to persist and surrender causes pain to decrease.

For many of us, the older we get, the worse we are at taking care of ourselves. This is partly because we have learned too much about what we should do, and it blocks our ability to live based on what we notice.

The system requires that we pay attention to excitement in the body, rather than concepts in the mind.

Repeated observation of this phenomenon has led me to the conclusion that there is a particular wttlearning required for human growth to continue beyond adolescence, and most people don't unlearn it. What must be unlearned is the habit of being lost in value judgments that override experience. My teen-aged nephew would rather look cool, while freezing to death waiting for the school bus, than wear a warm jacket that is not as "in" as the shirt he is wearing. Most people don't grow beyond such adolescent tricks with or without therapy.

They will take care of a car, house, child, job, pet, boss, deadline, spouse, stranger, or any number of people and things on an endless list before they take care of themselves.

anyone or anything else BUT themselves. They will take care of a car, house, child, job, pet, boss, deadline, spouse, stranger, or any number of people and things on an endless list before they take care of themselves.

The primary, fundamental, essential, baseline, critical, lowest-level minimum requirement for happiness, without which there is no other hope, is a willingness to take care of oneself.

The therapy was unsuccessful because he always knew the answer to everything, so there was no need to experiment with anything different.

All illnesses, whether psychological or physical, are stress-related. Any complete job of psychotherapy must produce an observable and measurable change in physical tension, a decrease in the form of psychological misery the person first reports, and no new misery to take its place. Both the therapist and the client must perceive a decrease in the psychological misery complained about in the beginning. Equally important, other people who knew the client before therapy must notice that the person is more rested, more at ease, and less miserable, and not just screwed up in a new way.

Nothing interrupts the mind like telling the truth

Most of the walking wounded can't tell down from up anymore. Because self-crippling people will continue to cripple themselves with any "self-improvement" program, we have to interrupt their mechanical replication of their own suffering before we can do anything other than waste time trying to teach them anything new.

Diet, exercise, and psychological healing programs can support people in learning to create wellness as a natural, ongoing state of being. This approach is radically different from the typical moralism of the usual "try harder to do good" approach. In fact, such moralism is a primary source of injury and ill health among health freaks. Show me a moralist and I'll show you someone who doesn't know how to take care of him or herself.

We have all experienced well-being and have memories of times we felt whole and full and fine. Well-being has to be continually relearned and reexperienced through a redirection of attention away from the preconceptions of the mind and toward the experiences of excitement in the body. Once well-being as a continual process of noticing and rediscovery has been learned, the way a person spends time and what he or she does in his or her life changes noticeably.

We have all experienced well-being and have memories of times we felt whole and full and fine. Well-being has to be continually relearned and reexperienced through a redirection of attention away from the preconceptions of the mind and toward the experiences of excitement in the body.

There is no reason not to drink alcohol and smoke marijuana if you keep in good physical shape by working out, and if you don't have to have them to be happy.

When people stop getting drunk or stoned or high incessantly and enjoy themselves more when they do those things occasionally, they have clearly started taking better care of themselves.

Well-being is the antithesis of this cycle. Well-being starts with the dawning realization that you are being helplessly buffeted from non-awareness to sickness to temporary relief, and that despite your efforts to take care of yourself, you still end up in this vicious cycle.

One of the reasons the temporary relief of being drunk gets to be so precious is that getting drunk knocks one's conscience in the head. For a while the goddamned moralist within shuts up. That is wonderful for a little while, but when you sober up the moralist within works overtime.

Out of our learned numbness, we allow stress to accumulate, further numbing our innate aliveness. Alcohol and drugs provide a temporary respite from our lifenumbing, distracting minds. After the respite from our minds comes the hangover or the letdown. When this form of relief becomes habitual, greater stress is always the result, because people become obsessively attached to some form of relief that is poisonous. This is the vicious cycle of addiction.

We are seeing the dawn of a new era of healing in which physical health and psychological well-being are synonymous.

People who are not well psychologically poison and hurt themselves physically. Some of the ways we poison and hurt ourselves are a part of our tradition. (Two of the commonly-accepted forms of treatment for stress are beer and food—the poor person's tranquilizers.)

After the Industrial Revolution, the tempo of change quickened, and destabilizing new experience became more frequent, the interludes of regeneration shorter. Today we are battered by an endless stream of stimuli, and, for many of us, the unregenerated nervous system remains in a state of persistent tension. Human biochemistry has not adapted to the radical change in lifestyle.

What we consider to be a normal amount of stimulation for an average human being is far greater than what was considered normal during all of previous human history. Quite recently there has been a change in the way humans live. For the greater part of human history, most people lived harder, shorter, and less hyperstimulated lives. Although there were emotional peaks of joy or terror, the average level of stimulation was relatively low. There was time for life to pass through cycles in which tension alternated with periods of rest and regeneration. Life followed the seasons, and the daily cycle of light and dark had a greater influence on how one lived.

What we consider to be a normal amount of stimulation for an average human being is far greater than what was considered normal during all of previous human history. Quite recently there has been a change in the way humans live. For the greater part of human history, most people lived harder, shorter, and less hyperstimulated lives. Although there were emotional peaks of joy or terror, the average level of stimulation was relatively low.

Wellness is a natural state of being for people who have learned how to get out of their own way.

• Grow or die. If you don't keep growing you go dead.

• Make requests from your mate for what you want but stay willing to take care of yourself You can practice this by picking something you usually complain about your mate's not doing for you, and then sit down with them and practice. You say something like this: "If you want to please me, if you want to know what would make me happy, here is what I would really like for you to do: ______________________If you don't do that; it's O.K., I'm a big girl (boy), and I will take care of it myself. You are not obligated to make or keep me happy or to do what I want, I am responsible for my own happiness. If I get mad at you, I will handle it, and I'll get over it. If I get disappointed, I'll be responsible for my own disappointment." Wouldn't it be great to be married to someone who really did that? This is a fine basic sort of position to come from to relate to other people in general: here is what I want, but you don't have to provide it for me. You are invited and requested, but not obligated, to take care of me.

• Make requests from your mate for what you want but stay willing to take care of yourself You can practice this by picking something you usually complain about your mate's not doing for you, and then sit down with them and practice. You say something like this: "If you want to please me, if you want to know what would make me happy, here is what I would really like for you to do: ______________________If you don't do that; it's O.K., I'm a big girl (boy), and I will take care of it myself. You are not obligated to make or keep me happy or to do what I want, I am responsible for my own happiness. If I get mad at you, I will handle it, and I'll get over it. If I get disappointed, I'll be responsible for my own disappointment." Wouldn't it be great to be married to someone who really did that? This is a fine basic sort of position to come from to relate to other people in general: here is what I want, but you don't have to provide it for me. You are invited and requested, but not obligated, to take care of me.

• Make requests from your mate for what you want but stay willing to take care of yourself You can practice this by picking something you usually complain about your mate's not doing for you, and then sit down with them and practice. You say something like this: "If you want to please me, if you want to know what would make me happy, here is what I would really like for you to do: ______________________If you don't do that; it's O.K., I'm a big girl (boy), and I will take care of it myself. You are not obligated to make or keep me happy or to do what I want, I am responsible for my own happiness. If I get mad at you, I will handle it, and I'll get over it. If I get disappointed, I'll be responsible for my own disappointment." Wouldn't it be great to be married to someone who really did that? This is a fine basic sort of position to come from to relate to other people in general: here is what I want, but you don't have to provide it for me.

• Create together some common cause you are both inter ested in and committed to accomplishing. This opens up the possibility of working together, in communication with each other, in agreement about what you are both dedicated to accomplishing. You feel helped by each other, grateful to each other, willing to acknowledge each other, and capable of bringing about results in the world together. Actually cre ating something together is a lot of fun.

3. Loving the holy human prototype is more important than loving the personality. The holy human prototype is the person you see when you look into someone else's eyes without prejudgment. The holy human prototype is like a child. It is the noticer. It is the being, just like you, just across from you. It is the being who, you can tell by just looking, like looking in a mirror, has the same kind of electric circuitry as yourself. You can love that being of the other as much as you love yourself. When that being is a child, you can love her more than yourself. Beings do a better job of loving each other than minds.

2. Desperation is a terrible basis for union. If the couple I just talked about had gotten married when they got scared they were about to lose each other, and stayed married on that basis, it would have been a desperate union. That kind of marriage sucks.

We end up resenting the person, with whom we used to be in love, for changing. When you start expecting the other person to live up to your expectations based on what you felt before, you are going to get disappointed and pissed off.

Too bad that once we are warmed, and begin to "believe that we belong," the feeling becomes a belief, to be preserved and guarded and defended so the feeling will never go away. This of course, makes the feeling go away.

Being "in Love" at the beginning of a relationship is wonderful. I think it is the result of us getting in touch with being, through another person. When you fall in love and get in that blissful state, you just love being, your being and the being of the beloved and the being of all beings in the world.

Whether you are monogamous or polygamous is not the most critical factor in having a successful couple. Whether or not you tell the truth is.

There is no reason why both people in a partnership can't have orgasms every time they have sex. If one partner takes longer to come than another, instead of having an argument about who comes too early and who comes too late, get a vibrator or some pornographic books or tapes and ■work on a way of both coming each time whether simultaneously or not. When you don't say and do what you want, don't blame your partner.

I frequently prescribe the exercise, included in the previous list, of masturbating to orgasm in front of each other with no assistance from each other. This exercise is useful in several ways. Not only do people get a chance to demonstrate being pleased sexually and how they do it for themselves, they also demonstrate, for the benefit of their partner, their capability to please themselves without help.

Sex with Each Other Demonstrate whatever pleases you that you have the power to demonstrate. Touch yourself in the ways you like to be touched and describe what you are doing while you do it. Have your partner practice touching you in the ways you like, and say what you don't like. It is your responsibility to train your partner to please you.

Sex with Each Other Demonstrate whatever pleases you that you have the power to demonstrate. Touch yourself in the ways you like to be touched and describe what you are doing while you do it. Have your partner practice touching you in the ways you like, and say what you don't like.

There are three areas of conversation about sex1, sexual history, sex with each other, and current sexual activities or interests other than the partner.

Telling the Truth About Sex I am still amazed at how normally intelligent people who have been living together or married and having sex for years still can't talk to each other about sex. Most couples haven't told each other about their sexual history, much less their current sexual involvements. According to a recent survey by James Patterson and Peter Kim reported in their book, The Day America Told the Truth2, 35% of married people are having an affair and keeping it secret from their spouses.

The problem with all of this is, when we are mad at someone, the first thing we want to do to punish him is to cut him off by turning him into a category, which then gives us a chance to have an orgasm of righteous indignation. This is fairly gratifying, but leaves you hungry and empty in a strange way. You get a hit of righteous energy, but you do not have a powerful relationship. However, if you are committed to the rediscovery of being, in your partner and yourself, there is a pretty good chance you can have a powerful loving relationship, where forgiveness and renewal occur over

When you are a being, standing before another being, you are a different being than when you are a being standing before an it, an idea, or a thing, that is not a being.

Powerful Relationships In powerful relationships, our nature as human beings is revealed to us. The fundamental way we come to know who we are is in relationships.

here is something lost and something gained in coupling up. You give away a lot of power and freedom when you get in a relationship. I had a few times between marriages when I could do any goddamned thing I wanted to, without having to account to some woman for it. Every time, after a while, I traded my freedom in for the greater act of creation and the other form of freedom of a committed relationship.

The process of forgiveness involves the following six minimal requirements, none of which may be skipped. 1. You have to tell the truth about what specific behav ior you resent, to the person, face-to-face; 2. You have to be verbally and vocally unrestrained with regard to volume and propriety; 3. You have to pay attention to the feelings and sensa tions in your body and to the other person as you speak; 4. You have to express any appreciations for the person that come up in the process, with the same attention to your feelings and to the other person as when you are expressing resentments; 5. You have to stay with any feelings that emerge in the process, like tears or laughter, regardless of any evalu ations you may have about how it makes you look; 6. You have to stay with the discussion until you no longer feel resentful of the other person.

Repressing anger to control other people's behavior (in this case, to keep them from leaving) is ultimately what leads to our inability to make contact with them. Repressed anger blocks the flow of love and creativity that we once experienced around them, and generates a flurry of thoughts for us to get caught up in. The more we are caught up in our thoughts, the less present we are to the other person and to what is happening in our own momentto-moment experience.

Many of us won't express anger with a loved one. We believe that if we expressed our resentment, it would destroy our relationship and our beloved would leave us. But without the freedom to tell the truth about our experience, our relationships inevitably suffer. When we express only our appreciation and withhold our anger, we lose our ability to be fully present with the ones we love, and, sooner or later, we become less able to appreciate them.

People really get mad ■when they're resented for withholding anger—something for which they feel they should be appreciated. But, contrary to popular belief, people resent being withheld from and lied to. Withheld anger destroys relationships by sucking the aJiveness out of them.

As we accumulate resentment for not being appreciated for sacrificing our lives to protect others, our acts of love and courage become poisoned memories. The person who loved you and whom you used to love becomes the biggest pain-inthe-ass of your life.

Salvation is the rediscovery of ourselves as being.

People who are able to make a certain diet work can probably make any diet work. The other 88% want to lose weight, and do for a while, but can't sustain the change.

I think effectiveness in maintaining weight loss is one of the most graphic ways of determining the effectiveness of psychotherapy. When I support someone in losing weight and keeping it off, I must respectfully request his mind to come up with another answer. People who lose weight successfully come up with other answers. People who don't lose weight successfully fail to come up with other answers. Across the board, on all diets, only about 12% of the people who lose weight maintain the loss for a year. Statistics about weight loss are probably very much reflective of the likelihood of any lasting psychological change.

Again, as Fritz Perls put it, the objective is to "lose your mind and come to your senses."

Again, as Fritz Perls put it, the objective is to "lose your mind and

Once a person comes to his senses, he can learn to rely less and less on his mind's ideas and beliefs, and really know from moment to moment how he feels.

Refocusing Our Awareness A human being can only be aware of three things: 1. things happening in the immediate environment, 2. feelings and sensations inside the body, and 3. thoughts and fantasies. Most of us spend most of our time paying attention to the third category, the mind-stream, and have lost touch with what is actually happening inside our skin and right in front of us. We fall into the habit of giving all of our attention to thoughts, beliefs, and fantasy, and thus we lose touch with the basis of all fantasy: experience.

Have you ever noticed that after you have had an uncomfortable encounter with someone in which you didn't fully express how you felt at the time, your mind talks to you incessantly?

The key to the cure for neurosis is not only the identification of the feelings being denied, but the person's acknowledgment, of those feelings.

Whether we earn the label neurotic depends only on the frequency, persistence, and intensity with which we deny feelings, sensations, or any experience whatsoever. A person who refuses to acknowledge experience over and over is a neurotic.

Whether we earn the label neurotic depends only on the frequency, persistence, and intensity with which we deny feelings, sensations, or any experience whatsoever.

To the extent that we all occasionally avoid experience, we all occasionally indulge in neurotic behavior.

A neurotic is a person who incessantly demands that life be other than it is. A person refusing to accept what is being experienced in any given moment is being neurotic at that moment.

A neurotic is a person who incessantly demands that life be other than it is.

Neurosis Neurosis is essentially a refusal to accept what is happening in the present.

Just as we fear the consequences of expressing anger or sexual feelings, we fear the consequences of giving and receiving love. God forbid we should get too happy! If we let ourselves bubble over, we fear that we just might bubble away. We are afraid that if we let ourselves love freely, we'll be opening ourselves up for tremendous hurt. Joy and expressions of love are thus the primary repressed emotions and actions. We don't trust happiness. We preserve the superstition that if we get too happy we're in for a downfall.

I believe joy is the most primitively repressed emotion, and the one closest to the original source experience of unity in the womb and early life. Children have the freedom to express joy openly. Adults repress joy. It is a way of protecting ourselves from being hurt.

Thus, the angry feelings we try to control end up controlling us. They keep us fat as we eat to suppress them, or alienated and more alone as we act even nicer to control them.

The warfare going on inside us, disowned, gets projected into the outside world.

After a couple of world wars in which people killed each other in large numbers, it became obvious that society had another serious sickness in addition to sexual repression: the repression of anger. Fritz Perls wrote a book called Ego, Hunger and Aggression in the 1940s, in which he developed a theory concerning the causes and treatment of aggression. He said that people had to learn how to make aggressing a process of personal psychological growth instead of a cause.

We suppress our sexuality with guilt, moralism, and compensating forms of excitement like overeating, overworking, smoking cigarettes, taking drugs, drinking, and so on. We keep ourselves busy thinking, eating, working hard, and alternately using tranquilizers and stimulants rather than staying in touch with the sensations in our bodies.

A major social concern is how to be assured of control over other people's excitement. We make deals with other people not to let our excitement get out of hand if they will not let theirs get out of hand. We don't want to embarrass each other.

TABOOS AGAINST EXCITEMENT T he history of modern psychology is the history of this century's cultural taboos against excitement.

TABOOS AGAINST EXCITEMENT T he history of modern psychology is the history of this century's cultural taboos

All real suicides, where people really died, were the result of a battle between being and mind. In those cases the mind won.

Telling the truth is always interpreted by the mind as a threat to its security. When people think that who they are is their mind, they feel like they are committing suicide when they start telling the truth.

The being within which the mind resides yearns for freedom. The mind resists freedom. Freedom is antithetical to mind. The mind exists for survival. The mind was built to provide security, certainty, prediction, and control. The mind has surpassed its function of physical survival to ensure the survival of the "sea of suggestions" it long ago decided it was. The mind is a bullshit machine.

Making unpleasant uncertainty pleasant is like learning to enjoy being scared on a rollercoaster or to enjoy horror movies. The unpleasant uncertainty takes some time to get used to, but eventually becomes tolerable and even exciting. Just like the fun of scaring yourself on a rollercoaster ride, you learn to like the excitement of mild, ongoing risktaking.

Making unpleasant uncertainty pleasant is like learning to enjoy being scared on a rollercoaster or to enjoy horror movies. The unpleasant uncertainty takes some time to get used to, but eventually becomes tolerable and even exciting.

The person who learns to tell the truth is the most free, most alive kind of adult human being you'll ever see, but is more insecure than normal. The insecurity comes from having fewer beliefs to rely on for security. Although beliets don't really provide security, they provide an insulation against the world and one feels afraid but protected. Normally, we continue to anticipate catastrophe to justify the protection of our belief systems and to provide a sense of safety. By predicting and guarding against all negative future outcomes, our minds do the best they can to protect us from the unpleasant uncertainty of freedom.

What passes for sanity is an agreed-on form of insanity, which is an attempt to make life work out by legislating ideals and imposing values in our own minds and selling them to other minds. It is normal to be insane. Being sane is abnormal. Abnormal, sane, honest people are less worried and more free than normal people. They are, however, less secure. This feeling of being less secure is something you have to get used to. In the beginning it's a burden. Then it becomes a possibility—a possible choice of a way to live—a choice made on purpose. Then it becomes an opportunity for creation.

An honest person, in contrast, focuses on saying what is so. Getting back to honesty rescues people from being normal.

It is normal to be unhappy; most people are. It is normal to discover that life doesn't live up to its billing. It is normal to be disappointed but getting along and doing the best you can. It's not normal to be honest. What is normal is to be concerned foremost with having a good cover story. Normal people are concerned with figuring out the right thing to say that puts them in the best light. They want to live up to their own best guess about what the people they are talking to want to hear.

A lot of what I have to say is depressing and negative. Nevertheless, I invite you to take courage from what I say and begin the work of learning to tell the truth. When I say what people normally do, please take it as a personal invitation to be abnormal. The best way to judge what is normal is simply to look into the faces of people walking down the street or on the subway or driving to work. Keep track of how many look happy. In my most recent count, seven out of ten looked either dead or damned unhappy. This is an invitation to abnormality from someone who has tried both normal lying and abnormal truth telling.

We are all terrible liars. People with notable stress disorders like ulcers, insomnia, spastic colitis, etc., are worse liars than normal people, although normal people are generally unhappy from lying, withholding, hiding, and avoiding and evading as well.

We compensate for our sense of something missing and our boredom with a kind of frenetic, compulsive use of food, alcohol, and drugs to try to get temporary relief from imprisonment in our own minds.

We invent some fundamental lies about how life should be and shouldn't be, how life is or isn't according to what we have taught ourselves to ignore or deny and what can or cannot be talked about.

Our problems do not arise from not thinking enough before we speak. Just the opposite is true. The way we learn to think and modify what we have to say before we speak kills millions of us unnecessarily and lays waste most of the cripples left, injured but still alive.

Learning how to be honest and being willing to do so is the cure for all non-environmental stress disorders.

An honest person is concerned foremost with accuracy. Being honest is not just for the sake of feeling good about being a virtuous person; it is a vital necessity.

Descriptive words make pictures happen in the minds of the speaker and the hearer, create experiences like sexual excitement, anger, righteous indignation, embarrassment, sympathy, sadness, joyfulness, or laughter. An honest person is one who is creating vivid pictures, feelings, sounds, and smells in the singular attempt to portray what has occurred or is occurring within her or around her.

Liars evaluate almost exclusively, only using enough description to make the story believable.

Honest people speak simply, using language more to describe than to evaluate.

Telling the truth has to do with being expressive of feeling and using descriptive language regardless of ideas about tact or propriety. The first thing you have to get over to tell the truth is politeness— modification of your report of your experience out of "consideration" of the other person's feelings. That is, unless your spouse gets a clear feeling from your report of how much fun it was when you fucked his best friend, you haven't told the truth yet.

Telling the truth means all of the worst things you might imagine it means. It means telling everything you have hidden that you have done in the past to the very people who you think would be most hurt or angry or surprised or embarrassed by the revelations. If, for example, you have been having sex with someone other than your spouse, you have to tell him/her all the details: who yon did it with, how many times, who came first, how many times you came, where it happened, whom you told, what you said to each other, how much fun it was, and so on, and answer all the questions that arise from the telling. Telling the truth means telling all your secrets and your secret feelings to whomever you don't want to tell.

An honest person prefers language that reveals what is so, whether it's about someone else, the ■world, or himself.

The clearer I am willing to be about myself, the more clearly I can see others and the more clearly I can speak to them.

Abstractions are a part of what is so. Feelings associated with abstractions are a part of what is so. You can still tell the truth by "pointing to" an abstraction or assessment of your mind, if your intent is simply to point out your thought, rather than to make the other person believe your thought to be the "right interpretation" of reality.

But feelings and thoughts are more difficult to tell the truth about than events. All words are abstractions. Although words that have immediate referents in the world are less abstract than words that cover a lot of territory, speak of general feelings, or make global assessments, they are still not the thing described. Words can "point to" something in the world like a chair, or something in a person like a feeling. When one is totally committed and captivated by pointing to what is so, one finds words to speak the truth, regardless of the level of abstraction.

Being descriptive of one's own feelings in so precise a way as to evoke feeling in another is the heart of the creative power of poetry and of honest speech.

Language may be inadequate to the task of complete communication.

The time comes when the feeling of insecurity becomes less than a dreaded occurrence. It becomes a most precious and valued form of excitement, a way of experiencing being alive in a heightened way, a way of getting high.

The time comes when the feeling of insecurity becomes less than a dreaded occurrence. It becomes a most precious and valued form of excitement, a way of experiencing being alive in

People who speak simply and clearly have chosen freedom over the escape into the illusion of security.

Bullshit is like heroin (or a warm blanket or money in the bank or life insurance)—it feels so good and protected and safe and warm that even if you do choke on your own puke, you don't mind so much. The alternative, freedom, is often too terrifying for a mind to tolerate, so the mind hides from freedom behind piles of bullshit, under blankets of evaluation, in a bed of memories.

I pretend on the one hand to be an authority, and on the other to have no authority. Both claims are true. And who I am right now doesn't have much to do with the evaluations and judgments that make up the role of authority, or the role of authority who simultaneously claims no authority. These poses are meaningless. The value of acknowledging these meaningless poses is that the limitations they impose on my way of being are lifted. I may still use what I know and admit what I don't know without worrying about what it means about me. The value of getting free from role domination is greater energy to use for creation rather than defense.

Getting born again feels real good for a while, until we get to thinking that who we are is someone who got born again. That someone who got born again needs to die again, and get born again, again. And so forth.

The language of the "being-in-the-moment" self is the language of the Lone Ranger's friend Tonto: "Me hungry." "Me thirsty." "Me wanta go."

When therapy works to relieve anxiety or depression or delusional pain, there is a transformation of the way life is became of a change in who a person says he is. Therapy is not merely to modify the behavior of the case-history self. Therapy has worked when the subject's whole identification with his case history is loosened, and an identification with his selfin-the-moment predominates. When this happens, people talk differently.

Still, it's clear that the revelations at each level of telling the truth allow for greater sharing of who a person is and what they are about. When we reveal more, we have less to hide. When we have less to hide, we are less worried about being found out. When we are less worried about being found out, we can pay better attention to someone else. In this way, telling the truth makes intimacy and freedom possible.

Owning up to the fact that there is no virtue in owning up is the continuation of the third level of telling the truth. What you end up with if you drop your new pride is innocence much like you had before you developed an identity. What you have then is an identity without being much attached to it.

Level three is sharing with other people in ways that occasionally allow you to overcome your own egotism, including the egotism that comes from thinking you are great for telling the truth.

Nobody I know stays at level three constantly. Continuous waves of freedom and new egotism, one liberation after another, keep just getting you back to the same place. But if you are in a community which supports you in telling the truth, you get to level three more often.

It is this ego-attachment to having heroically survived the unfairness of the world that has to be given up at level three of telling the truth.

It is this ego-attachment to having heroically survived the unfairness of the world that has to be

Before you acted smart; now you acknowledge ignorance like it is gold.

When you get to telling the truth about all of it, you are at level three. Who you are becomes more a description centered in the here and now, and less of a story about, your life.

You have to admit what a worm and a liar you are and go through the feelings that come up when you tell the truth about all of this. If you have never truly embarrassed yourself by what you had to say about yourself, you don't know shit from shmola about transformation.

hero to yourself and confess the putrid vanity

What you have been selling other people on, and selling yourself on, is not who you are. You don't really know who you are. You confess disillusionment with beliefs you used to stand for, and various sales pitches you did and still do for your act. This is at first embarrassing, then for a while something to brag about, and then just a description of what happened to you in the course of growing up.

The third level of telling the truth occurs when you admit, that who you are is not who you have been pretending to be.

"If you speak the truth long enough, your word becomes universal law

Imagine living out of the transformation D.H. Lawrence describes! This is the third level of telling the truth: the place where telling the truth and living the truth become the same.

When a person has not sufficiently expressed himself by telling the truth at this second level, the mind makes assessments. These judgments are distorted by the emotions withheld and avoided. Judgments like, "I'm too tired," "I can't take it anymore," "It's not worth the struggle," and "I've got to get out of this place," are products of incomplete disclosure of feelings toward, and thoughts about, others.

When a person has not sufficiently expressed himself by telling the truth at this second level, the mind makes assessments. These judgments are distorted by the emotions withheld and avoided. Judgments like, "I'm too tired," "I can't take it anymore," "It's not worth the struggle," and "I've got to get out of this place," are products of incomplete disclosure of feelings

Mark was another story. Because he felt guilty for having hurt her by running off with another woman, and a younger one at that, he couldn't add insult to injury, so he never allowed himself to get mad at her. He was desperate over having lost his job and his former relationship (two roles in which he had felt safe, though also trapped for a long time). A few months later he killed himself in his new girl friend's apartment. His anger, never sufficiently expressed, his fear, never sufficiently acknowledged, his judgments, never sufficiently exposed to another, wore him out and his mind ate him. He had told the truth about what he had been hiding from Beth at level one, but he held back on sharing his feelings with anyone during this time of great stress and distress.

Mark was another story. Because he felt guilty for having hurt her by running off with another woman, and a younger one at that, he couldn't add insult to injury, so he never allowed himself to get mad at her. He was desperate over having lost his job and his former relationship (two roles in which he had felt safe, though also trapped for a long time). A few months later he killed himself in his new girl friend's apartment. His anger, never sufficiently expressed, his fear, never sufficiently acknowledged, his judgments, never sufficiently exposed to another, wore him out and his mind ate him.

the rotten feelings about ourselves. Through the process of forgiving our enemies our own forgiveness occurs. This is why we have to forgive others: for our own benefit. Beth forgave Mark and herself.

Once the resentment and appreciation and hurt get sorted out and expressed, the grieving subsides enough for the person to make a new start. The person forgives her lover, not for the lover's benefit but for her own. She experiences the love, and lets go. She experiences the hatred, and lets go. Finally, she experiences the grief and lets go.

Once the resentment and appreciation and hurt get sorted out and expressed, the grieving subsides enough for the person to make a new start. The person forgives her lover, not for the lover's benefit but for her own.

The second level of telling the truth comes about through experimenting, usually in group therapy as well as in real life, to find out the difference between trying to make things happen through manipulation and having things happen through telling the truth.

Likewise, honesty does not always bring a response of love, but it is absolutely essential to it. When I am honestly myself, and you respond warmly and with caring, then love exists. If I calculate and put on phony behavior in order to please you, you may love my behavior, but you cannot love me, because I have hidden my real existence behind this artificial behavior. Even when you love in response to my phony behavior, I cannot really receive your love. It is poisoned by my knowledge that the love is for the image I have created, not for me. I also have to be continually on guard to be sure that I maintain my image so that your love does not disappear. Since I have shut myself off from your love in this way, I will feel more lonely and unloved, and try even more desperately to manipulate myself and you in order to get this love.

This is the only kind of behavior that can bring about a response of trust. Trust is my response to a person that I know I can believe. Even if I dislike a person, I can trust him if he is honest with me, and I can respect his willingness to be himself honestly.

Honesty, however, is a behavior and is something I can choose or not choose. I cannot decide to love or trust, but I can decide to be personally honest or not. And when I choose to be really honest and say what I experience and what I feel, I am showing that I can be trusted.

A great deal has been written about trust and love, and that if you can build a trusting, loving relationship, then people can be honest with each other. I believe this idea is exactly backwards. It is very nice if I feel trusting and loving toward someone, but if I don't feel this way, what can I do about it? Trust and love are my feeling responses toward another person, and these responses cannot be manufactured. Either I feel love or I don't. All the emphasis on trust and love results in many peopie pretending to feel trust and love "because it is healthy, and will bring about closeness, honesty, etc."—adding a new area of phoniness and dishonesty in their behavior.

A great deal has been written about trust and love, and that if you can build a trusting, loving relationship, then people can be honest with each other. I believe this idea is exactly backwards. It is very nice if I feel trusting and loving toward someone, but if I don't feel this way, what can I do about it? Trust and love are my feeling responses toward another person, and these responses cannot be manufactured. Either I feel love or I don't. All the emphasis on trust and love results in many peopie pretending to feel trust and love "because it is healthy, and will bring about closeness, honesty, etc."—adding a new area of phoniness

Manipulation never works to get the result desired, but it always seems like it's just about to work. When you get what you said you wanted by manipulation, it is never enough. When you tell the truth and get what you want, getting what you want is like gravy—it feels like you are getting more than you ever hoped for, rather than just okay but not quite good enough.

The appearance of success is a performance in which you are cut off from contact with the audience except through your role. A successful life, in contrast, is one in which you can share with others openly, as your life happens, without all that rehearsal.

Level Two: Honesty About Current Thoughts and Feelings The second level of telling the truth is to begin to speak forth the emotional truth and the truth of one's judgments— to reveal one's constantly active, secret mind. You begin here the practice of admitting how you feel when you feel it, speaking your secret judgments of others out loud, and constantly revealing your own petty and condescending ways.

You tell the facts from the past that have been withheld, you no longer have to be paranoid about being found out, and you get back the energy that was being used up for years to hide the facts.

You tell the facts from the past that have been withheld, you no longer have to be paranoid about being found out, and you get back the energy that

You tell the facts from the past that have been withheld, you no longer have to be paranoid about being found

Then, when we relate to other people, we can come from a consciousness of our whole being and the being of others and have a personality, rather than be had by our personality.

Here is another way of saying it. We have to go through adolescence and develop an identity, and answer the question, "Who am I?" Having established that identity, we have to give up our attachment to it, and remember who we were, at the beginning, before we developed that identity.

The three levels are: revealing the facts; honestly expressing current feelings and thoughts; and, finally, exposing the fiction you have devised to represent yourself and your history.

Intimacy is a power grown into after adolescence. The person capable of intimacy—that is, the person capable of telling the truth—still has roles to play, but is no longer trapped by them. The integrated person behind the role no longer has anything to hide, and can relate freely to the being he knows is hidden behind the roles others are playing. The person is then in charge, rather than the role.

The ability to "get naked" in front of other people who are still in their roles, as Kathleen did, is important. Coming out from behind our roles permits us to look behind the roles of others. Because we can see more clearly, the threat of other

But telling the truth kills nothing but false roles, images, interpretations, and lies,

The difference between our survival tactics and those of animals is that theirs are necessary for the continuation of their physical existence, and ours are not. But we act as though ours were.

Oppression masked as "concern" provokes in the child a response of hatred, severing of communication, and withdrawal from relationship with those closest to him.

In this quest, control is one of the first things children learn that they need to learn. That was just one of those things we found out when we grew up: we needed to get control of ourselves. But the imposition of control is often the source of anger. The imposition of control on anger is the source of even greater anger.

In this quest, control is one of the first things children learn that they need to learn. That was just one of those things we found out when we grew up: we needed to get control of ourselves. But the imposition of control is often the source of anger. The imposition of control on anger is

Moralism is a disease in which "good" and "bad" become more important than "alive" or "dead."

Most of us suffered a lot in childhood from believing that something must be wrong with us, or our parents wouldn't be so unhappy.

We must grow beyond where human beings were for all of those years of recalling and hoping for paradise. Because of the various doomsday scenarios for the fate of the earth, we must make a sudden advance in consciousness or perish. Unless more human beings expand who they consider themselves to be, by re-including what they excluded when they grew a personality—unless more of us grow beyond the ignorant provincialism of adolescent moralizing—the game is over. Like rats behind the Pied Piper, we will follow our leaders off the cliff and back into the sea forever.

Mystics are people who rediscover experience.

Meditation, sitting quietly until the mind settles down, brings a sense of wholeness. I believe the primary value of meditation is that, while meditating, we reunify the memory of our first sense of being with our current breathing, heartbeating, sensate, present-tense experience of being. Being a living being, "knowing" in our bones that we have been being for some time, is the heart of who each of us is. We are beings alive behind the mask of personality. Sitting in the Zendo (a place of meditation), that is what we find when we let ourselves be.

To be whole, we must recontact the being we are and were and evermore shall be until the end of each of our times. That being is the creator being—the background hum that keeps us cooking, the basic circuit board, the baseline buzz. The cognitive faculties of the mind are a secondary development for steering, not the primary driving force of life. Minds are developed and lead us away from the experience of being, and religious practices were developed to get us back to it. All religions were developed to help us get back home to the hum we started with.

The ever-present ocean of experience has no inside or outside. Inside us and outside us are both inside us. Who we are is the Being within which occurs that experience we call "inside our body" and that experience we call "outside our body." More accurately, we are the inside and outside experience itself, happening. We learn "inside" and "outside" an eternity after the light first comes on (because then we had no concept of time) and years after we are born. (It takes an. eternity plus a couple of years before our minds distinguish "inside" and "outside.")

There is a Zen story about two fishes arguing about the existence of the ocean. The first fish says, "It's all around you. You are surrounded by it. You are surrounded by water. You have lived in water all of your life." "Show me! Prove it! Where is this ocean?" the second fish demands. This difficulty in being aware of the perpetual, continuous, taken-forgranted, sustenance of being is that it has been there since the light first came on. We have nothing with which to compare it; no measure of its existence.

What we call the "self" is a creation of further interactions of the sea of suggestions. The being we were when we began, the being we actually still are, alive in an ocean of experience, including all the ocean as itself, recedes to the background of our attention, and the "self" we have created comes to the foreground. As we identify with our newly created self, we lose touch with the being we are and have been since the light came on.

What we call the "self" is a creation of further interactions of the sea of suggestions. The being we were when we began, the being we actually still are, alive in an ocean of experience, including all the ocean as itself, recedes to the background of our attention, and the "self" we have created comes to the foreground.

just a few years we are so surrounded by our creation, the sea of suggestions, we can hardly touch or taste or smell or feel or see the ocean of experience that still surrounds us. We forget we live in a sea that is a part of an ocean at all. We forget we are the source of the whole ocean. Getting born again is remembering that.

just a few years we are so surrounded by our creation, the sea of suggestions, we can hardly touch or taste or smell or feel or see the ocean of experience that still surrounds us.

just a few years we are so surrounded by our creation, the sea of suggestions, we can hardly touch or taste or smell or feel or

As you may recall, we have a lot to deal with in order to grow up all the way to adulthood. After forming a personality and losing touch, with the wholeness of being, we then rediscover wholeness, but experience it as a threat to our personality. Personality can eventually be included in the wholeness of being, but not without some hard work that requires courage and takes a while. It is a process of disintegration and reintegration. Some people call it dying and getting born again.

As you may recall, we have a lot to deal with in order to grow up all the way to adulthood. After forming a personality and losing touch, with the wholeness of being, we then rediscover wholeness, but experience it as a threat to our personality.

Who we actually are, of course, remains always more than the mental images we form while growing up. First we are the experiencer of what is momentarily present; second we are the multi-sensory recorder of experience; last, and less importantly, we are the rememberer. Later, we are most focused on remembering our own reputations. But who we always really are, from the beginning, is a context, a parenthesis, a being who creates the world for itself by sensing. We are the Being who is the source of being and remembering. Re-contacting that basic beginning electrical sensate self rescues us from the mind—the murderer, and potential ally, within.

When we become aware of ourselves as indefinable, uncategorizeable, simple, creators of the world, we lose all certainty. Being present to the immediate moment-to-moment passing of the world, the fragility of our own being, and the relative unimportance of the personality we think we are, is a terrifying experience. Being fully aware of our ever-present, ever-changing existence throws us into the same ineffable state as when the light came on while we were unseeing in the womb. Simultaneous awareness of the life of being, and the lesser importance of the personality to which we have become attached, is a second enlightenment, that comes to all humans who grow up beyond the stage of adolescence. But it feels like dying. To avoid the trauma of it, the great majority of us remain adolescents until the end of our lives. This is not a minor philosophical point. This is the heart of the matter. Most of us would rather kill ourselves than be, particularly if who we think we are keeps dying. Many of us do.

It is our fate as human beings to grasp after the ineffable, trying to regain a lost sense of unity. Even so, when we do get in touch with unity, the vastness of our being, for a few seconds, we usually run. We feel as if we are about to lose something. We are. We are about to lose the protection and safety of the limited definition of self we have come to think we are. We are afraid of losing who we think we are, which is special, and we are afraid of becoming who we actually are, which is not special.

All religions, gods, metaphysics, theologies, philosophies, and teachings of masters of all faiths are attempts to remember these eternal months past, this lost sense of unity.

Managing the disease of moralism is done by telling the truth like children do before they lose their innocence.

Moralism and lying go hand in hand. Being "good" and "looking good," conscientiously valued, lead directly to lying.

When we take innocent and open children and train them to be moralists, we train them at one and the same time to be liars.

Without roles and rules we fear we will lose control of ourselves. We ■will go crazy. We will lose our minds. The more intensely these rules and roles are defended, the further removed from grounding in experience the individual becomes.

Having passed the bar, if you are a high achiever, you then typically do a three- to seven-year stint of working 70 to 80 hours a week for a law firm trying to "make partner." After you have proven, through many additional trials, that you have learned to kiss ass in all circumstances, you may make partner. By the time you make partner you are a work MORAUSM aholic, so you keep up the pace out of habit, but also because you don't know what in the hell else to do in life but work and count principles. This is the group from which we choose our political representatives. This is where judges come from.

This is to teach you a lesson: do what you're told, no matter how ridiculous or unfair, if you want to be a lawyer. This continues, year after year, with the only apparent purpose being to make sure you have really learned to kiss ass in the culturally approved way.

More lawyers come to me for therapy than do members of any other profession, and it's not coincidence, since so much of their training is to learn to live by rules. One important rule they try to live by is that the proper way to be angry is to have a fight using the rules. They often try to do this in their private lives, with complete lack of success. Perpetual arguing to convince others of the Tightness of your case doesn't work worth a damn in personal relationships, and we all know it but can't seem to stop.

More lawyers come to me for therapy than do members of any other profession, and it's not coincidence, since so much of their training is to learn to live by rules.

Gregory Bateson says, in his calm, detached way, "Any species can get into an evolutionary cul-de-sac, and I suppose it is a mistake of sorts for that species to be a party to its own extinction. The human species, as we all know, may extinguish itself any day now."

The passing on of learning from one generation to the next is not a bad design, and as an evolutionary development, it seems to have triumphed. The idea-generating, self-perpetuating machine that has evolved seems to have worked. Human beings have taken over the world. The ability to act based on accumulated information, and to pass great quantities of new information on, is the primary survival characteristic of the strongest animal on earth. But, paradoxically, our survival mechanism has proved to be ultimately suicidal. It has allowed us to mass produce the consumables that provide us with the comfortable lifestyles that eventually kill us, to develop a technology for mass destruction of humans and the natural environment, and to rationalize the inexorable destruction of millions of lives relegated to fates of poverty, disease, and violence. Now we have to fix a few of our own glitches, perhaps in just a decade or two, or risk dying of our own evolution.

The disease of moralism in adults is characterized by hysterical faith in the mind.

individuals interested in integrity or wholeness over moralism and fitting into roles

We are all the walking wounded. Most of us are still interested in clarity and the truth, but at the same time we are interested in making a case for how our childhood was worse than average and how we're better than everyone else. The conventional way to suffer through life is to build a case for ourselves.

My clients and I have been learning from each other that the primary requirement for getting beyond adolescence is telling the truth. This book deals with the whole problem of telling the truth: the difficulty in telling the truth, how it hurts one not to tell the truth, how we are all liars, and how it works against our self-interest to lie.

The secret of this union is to release energy by living out loud rather than spending all of our energy trying to control ourselves and others through withholding.

This book delineates the problems that result from not escaping your constantly interpreting, lying mind; of not growing beyond the developmental stage of learning how to lie.

Yogis, Buddhist monks, golf pros, a few psychotherapy clients, some musicians, and an odd assortment of others regain their ability to pay attention in spite of the minds they have developed. These people somehow progress beyond being trapped in and dominated by the "mindstream," to the exclusion of everything else.

Fritz Perls, one of my teachers, recommended that people "lose their minds and come to their senses." Unless people who have grown minds learn to lose their minds and come to their senses again—pay attention to gravity, their own bodies, the world of real objects and other beings out there—they remain locked in their own tightly held notions of "how things are" and never notice any new experiences.

Such people learn to treat principles, not as rules engraved in stone, but as less important "rules of thumb" to be validated or invalidated by new experience. Rules of thumb can be revised or rejected or created anew if the people who hold them make allowances to include new experience.

Adolescents of all ages become more passionately attached to standards the more insecure they feel. Strong attachment to principle only increases our rigidity, which further increases our feeling of insecurity. Such behavior doesn't guide us through our changing experiences. The world of experience is like a river. You are better off with a boat than with a post to hold on to while the water beats you to death.* To grow beyond adolescence, people have to let go of, rather than tighten their grip on, the principles and standards with which they define themselves. This is usually very scary, like falling backward into the unknown.

Adolescents of all ages become more passionately attached to standards the more insecure they feel. Strong attachment to principle only increases our rigidity, which further increases our feeling of insecurity. Such behavior doesn't guide us through our changing experiences. The world of experience is like a river. You are better off with a boat than with a post to hold on to while the water beats you to death.* To grow beyond adolescence, people have to let go of, rather than tighten their grip on, the principles and standards with which they define themselves.

Adolescents of all ages become more passionately attached to standards the more insecure they feel. Strong attachment to principle only increases our rigidity, which further increases our feeling of insecurity. Such behavior doesn't guide us through our changing experiences. The world of experience is like a river. You are better off with a boat than with a post to hold on to while the water beats you to death.*

Adolescents miss the security of childhood and can't stand the uncertainty of being between childhood and adulthood. Out of anxiety and intolerance for ambiguity they grasp onto roles or rigid standards to claim an identity so they can escape the interminable struggle over how to fit in. xxxvn They become Christians or Hari Krishnas or gang members or hippies, or marry a childhood sweetheart, just to have a place to stand. They adopt the standards and principles of these groups to live by. Standards or principles to live by are all equal in this way: they are abstractions of the mind, summations based on past experience, not experience itself.

Adolescents miss the security of childhood and can't stand the uncertainty of being between childhood and adulthood. Out of anxiety and intolerance for ambiguity they grasp onto roles or rigid standards to claim an identity so they can escape the interminable struggle over how to fit in.

Thus, we run around in the world while running around in our minds trying to live up to standards we imagine others are requiring of us, while we starve for the nourishment that comes from commonplace experience.

We end up trying to eat the menu instead of the meal. Menus are nutritionally without value and taste like shit no matter what pretty pictures decorate their surface.

We end up trying to eat the menu instead of the meal.

We have lost this ability to pay attention—to live outside the set of assumptions a mind is—and the only method of orientation left is given by the roles we have been trying on for size.

We don't know who we are, and we try to guess who we ought to be in order to do the right thing and be happy. We get lost in the process and beat the hell out of ourselves before we even know we're hurt.

This extension of the time to choose vocational, sexual, and social identities in highly technological cultures is a mixed bag. Right now the fastest growing death rate in our society is for people between the ages of 15 and 24. Suicides, drug overdoses, accidents, and murder head the list of causes. We get a longer time to invent who we are, but the job takes a greater toll.

This process of learning to categorize experiences, and then forgetting the distinction between categories and experience itself, is what I call learning how to lie.

What kills us is intense attachment to our interpretations and failure to distinguish these interpretations from sensate reality.

In learning how to survive from birth to adulthood, we start out using our senses as a primary mode of orientation in the world and we end up as minded beings using principles of orientation. We abstract from our senses and build our minds. After a while we get so involved in mind development that we lose touch with our senses and get lost in our minds. Our minds are formed of interpretations about reality based on replicated experiences.

The central message of this book is that we human beings, in the course of growing up, get lost in our minds; and if we don't find our way out, our minds eventually kill us.

According to Hugh Thomas, author of A History of The World, the greatest medical advance in history has been garbage collection.3 The greatest psychological advance in history is just around the corner and will also have to do with cleaning up. Cleaning up lies and "coming out of the closet" is getting more attention these days. Some day we will look back on these years of suffocation in bullshit in the same way we look back on all the years people lived in, and died from, their garbage.

According to Hugh Thomas, author of A History of The World, the greatest medical advance in history has been garbage collection.3 The greatest psychological advance in history is just around the corner and will also have to do with cleaning up.

According to Hugh Thomas, author of A History of The

mind is developed to take good nourishing truth, absorb what it can, and turn the rest to shit. Unfortunately, the mind doesn't expel its wastes automatically like the body does. We have to do it voluntarily.

A few of us occasionally escape the bullshit jail of the mind. Most of us die in jail. All of us have the magnificent possibility of getting beyond the jail of our own minds, over and over again. The first step to this process is to doubt our minds. The truth turns to bullshit in the human mind just like food turns to excrement in the human body. Our minds work pretty much the same way our gastrointestinal systems

We believe our interpretations of reality intensely, and we want other people to join us in our interpretations to make us feel secure. We believe our interpretations are reality and if we can get enough votes we will prove it.

(As Nietzsche said, "Not doubt, certainty is what drives one insane."

Bullshit is a highly technical term used throughout this book. I stole this term from Fritz Perls, the father of Gestalt Therapy. Abstraction from past experiences being mistaken for current experience itself is the major disorienting error of the normal garden-variety neurotic. "I've been with you for 20 years—it should be obvious that I love you." Evidence from the past doesn't prove anything about current experience. We neurotics are people who make big generalizations to cover long periods of time. We say things like, "You always . . ." and "You never. . , ," We attribute all of our power to circumstances and say things like "It makes me. . .' ," When we say these things we usually have no idea we are living in an imaginary world of our own creation. Fritz Perls actually made three technical distinctions for poisonous assignment of value: chickenshit, bullshit, and elephant shit. Chickenshit is a normal greeting that doesn't mean what it says, as in "Hello, how are you?" "I'm fine, xxxii how are you?" Bullshit is normal conversation in which people are simply whiling away the time with meaningless abstractions and generalizations. Elephant shit is any discussion of Gestalt theory.

Creativity, using the mind rather than being used by the mind, is the cure for all stress disorders. Willingness to tell the truth in order to be free from your secretly assessing, secretkeeping mind creates the possibility of using your mind to make a future as an artist rather than as a victim.

The alternative to freedom is to live out a program imposed by prefabricated internalized moral resolves. Living this way is a gradual suffocation, which makes us simultaneously more dead and more desperate.

Freedom from such a "life" is a psychological achievement. The freedom achieved by people who grow beyond the limitations of their childhood conditioning is freedom from their own minds.

They all were very much in touch with being alive at one time and then got more and more lost in their minds. They miss something they can't quite get back to.

They work hard to survive and take care of themselves and their families. They try to have a good time and do the best they can. They are constantly doing the best they can and not having it be good enough. They kill themselves with the same socially acceptable poisons all their friends use.

Roles and rules are also thoughts, which, when grasped onto as principles, are hard for people to get over, or get beyond or let change. People choke the life out of themselves by tying themselves to a chosen "self image"—any "self image" whatsoever. Many adults remain in a perpetual adoles xxx cence, locked in the protective confinement of a limited set of roles and rules. This protection kills. According to a study conducted by The Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, 53% of the people who die prior to age 65 do so "for reasons directly related to lifestyle."1 Half of the people who die earlier than expected kill themselves by how they live. I say they kill themselves compensating for the starvation of being cut off from the nourishment of commonplace experience. They smoke, drink, take drugs, eat fat meat, watch TV, and don't exercise.

Because of being lost in our own minds, we fail to recognize that the truth changes. When the truth changes and we fail to recognize what has now become true, while holding on to the idea of what used to be true, we become liars committing suicide.

In order to survive, we have to apply what we have learned from experience. But it is equally true that in order to thrive—in order to stay alive—we have to overcome continually what we have previously learned. If we don't somehow get rescued from our assumptions about life, they devour us.

People say modern life is stressful. Stress is not a characteristic of life or times, but of people. Stress does not come from the environment, it comes from the mind of the individual under stress. We make certain assumptions about the world, and we become attached to those assumptions. We suffer from thinking. We worked too hard to learn our ideas about the world to give them up. Like poker players who have already lost too much, we desperately double the bet in hopes of forcing fate to give us a good card. We think about things too much and too seriously and we suffer a great deal from trying to make the world match our thinking. We complain about how the world fails to live up to our expectations. We think about how life doesn't live up to its billing, and how it should, and how it is rotten that it doesn't, and how we should somehow fix it. Many people think themselves to death.

Psychotherapy doesn't always work. My estimate is that about a third of the time the results are good to adequate, about a third of the clients make a few half-assed changes, and at least a third of the folks who see me don't get any good out of therapy worth mentioning.

Both the bodily ills and the steady unwanted emotional states go away because of a learning that takes place, and that learning always involves letting up on the demand that the world, including the demander, be other than what it is. Therapy is over when a person stops incessantly demanding that other people be different from what they are, forgives his or her parents and other begrudged former intimates, reclaims the power to make life work, and takes responsibility for doing so.

I work mostly with "garden variety" neurotics: average, basically healthy people who are anxious or depressed or both. Often these general states of being—anxiety or depression—are accompanied by somatic discomforts and diseases such as skin rashes, ulcers, lower back pain, spastic colitis, allergies, high blood pressure, and insomnia; or by recurring problems in relationships, on the job, or in the family. When therapy works, the somatic ills disappear or decrease in intensity; anxiety and depression as steady states go away; and people take responsibility for making their relationships, professional lives, and creative powers work. Taking responsibility means a person no longer blames outside circumstances, or other people, or past events for the conditions of his own life.

Normality is the key to avoiding change and continuing to suffer. People who want to be normal are often proud of it and victims to the ideal of normality: dead-suffering, deathdealing normality. Sigmund Freud once said that psychoanalysis was to help people get from intense suffering to common unhappiness. I don't think we have to settle for that. I help people focus their attention and muster their courage for the journey into previously avoided suffering, and then beyond to a truly abnormal life. Facing what one has previously avoided results in intense emotion and then a breakthrough into overflowing creativity. That overflowing creativity is the source of power for changing or re-shaping our lives.

The path we must follow to get over the suffering of deadness leads, initially, into greater suffering. For example, if you have deadened yourself for a long time to keep from experiencing anger, getting very angry will feel worse than deadness. But it's only your willingness to feel worse that will allow you to feel better.

I work to relieve their suffering, primarily the suffering of deadness. Deadness is a low-intensity form of suffering. It is the result of staying on guard against imagined greater dangers. The greater dangers we imagine are based on memories of how we have been hurt before. Many of us learned as children that being fully alive was bad and you got hurt for it, so we deadened ourselves: partly as a defense against the big people, and partly to spite them. Deadening ourselves was our way of hiding that we were alive in improper ways, and the only thing to do was to keep it a secret.

The mind is a jail built out of bullshit. This book tells how the bullshit jail of the mind gets built and how to escape. This is a "how to" book on freedom. Withholding from other people, not telling them about what we feel or think, keeps us locked in the jail. The longer we remain in that jail, the quicker we decline. We either escape, or we go dead. The way out is to get good at telling the truth.

We all lie like hell. It wears us out. It is the major source of all human stress. Lying kills people. The kind of lying that is most deadly is withholding, or keeping back information from someone we think would be affected by it.

We all lie like hell. It wears us out. It is the major source of all human stress. Lying kills people. The kind of lying that is most deadly is withholding, or keeping back information from someone we think would be affected by

